.TH pappl-system 3 "pappl system functions" "2022-11-07" "pappl system functions"
.SH NAME
pappl-system \- pappl system functions
.SH LIBRARY
Printer Application Framework (libpappl, "pkg-config --cflags --libs pappl")
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <pappl/pappl.h>
.PP
.I typedef struct _pappl_system_s
.B pappl_system_t;

.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplSystemAddListeners "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *name);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemAddMIMEFilter "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *srctype, const char *dsttype, pappl_mime_filter_cb_t cb, void *data);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemCleanJobs "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I pappl_system_t	*
.br
.BI papplSystemCreate "(pappl_soptions_t options, const char *name, int port, const char *subtypes, const char *spooldir, const char *logfile, pappl_loglevel_t loglevel, const char *auth_service, bool tls_only);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemDelete "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I pappl_printer_t	*
.br
.BI papplSystemFindPrinter "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *resource, int printer_id, const char *device_uri);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetAdminGroup "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetAuthService "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I pappl_contact_t	*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetContact "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_contact_t *contact);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplSystemGetDefaultPrinterID "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetDefaultPrintGroup "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetDNSSDName "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetFooterHTML "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetGeoLocation "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetHostname "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetLocation "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I pappl_loglevel_t
.br
.BI papplSystemGetLogLevel "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I size_t
.br
.BI papplSystemGetMaxLogSize "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetName "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplSystemGetNextPrinterID "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I pappl_soptions_t
.br
.BI papplSystemGetOptions "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetOrganization "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetOrganizationalUnit "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetPassword "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplSystemGetPort "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetServerHeader "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetSessionKey "(pappl_system_t *system, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplSystemGetTLSOnly "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplSystemGetUUID "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplSystemGetVersions "(pappl_system_t *system, int max_versions, pappl_version_t *versions);"
.PP
.I char		*
.br
.BI papplSystemHashPassword "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *salt, const char *password, char *buffer, size_t bufsize);"
.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplSystemIsRunning "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplSystemIsShutdown "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemIteratePrinters "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_printer_cb_t cb, void *data);"
.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplSystemLoadState "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *filename);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplSystemMatchDriver "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *device_id);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemRemoveResource "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *path);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemRun "(pappl_system_t *system);"
.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplSystemSaveState "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *filename);"

.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetAdminGroup "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetContact "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_contact_t *contact);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetDefaultPrinterID "(pappl_system_t *system, int default_printer_id);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetDefaultPrintGroup "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetDrivers "(pappl_system_t *system, int num_drivers, pappl_driver_t *drivers, pappl_driver_cb_t cb, void *data);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetDNSSDName "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetFooterHTML "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *html);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetGeoLocation "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetHostname "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetLocation "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetLogLevel "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_loglevel_t loglevel);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetMaxLogSize "(pappl_system_t *system, size_t maxSize);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetMIMECallback "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_mime_cb_t cb, void *data);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetNextPrinterID "(pappl_system_t *system, int next_printer_id);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetOperationCallback "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_ipp_op_cb_t cb, void *data);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetOrganization "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetOrganizationalUnit "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetPassword "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *hash);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetSaveCallback "(pappl_system_t *system, pappl_save_cb_t cb, void *data);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetUUID "(pappl_system_t *system, const char *value);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemSetVersions "(pappl_system_t *system, int num_versions, pappl_version_t *versions);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplSystemShutdown "(pappl_system_t *system);"

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B PAPPL
system functions provide access to the system object.
System are created and deleted by the printer application while the life cycle of the
.B pappl_system_t
object is managed automatically for the printer application.
The
.B papplSystemCreate
function creates a new system while the
.B papplSystemDelete
function deletes a system.
.PP
The
.B papplSystemRun
function starts a system while the
.B papplSystemShutdown
function stops a running system.
.PP
The
.B papplSystemGet
functions get the current values associated with a system while the
.B papplSystemSet
functions set the current values associated with a system.
.SH ENUMERATIONS
.SS pappl_netconf_e
Network configuration mode
.TP 5
PAPPL_NETCONF_DHCP
.br
Full DHCP
.TP 5
PAPPL_NETCONF_DHCP_MANUAL
.br
DHCP with manual IP address
.TP 5
PAPPL_NETCONF_MANUAL
.br
Manual IP, netmask, and router
.TP 5
PAPPL_NETCONF_OFF
.br
Turn network interface off
.SS pappl_soptions_e
System option bits
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_DNSSD_HOST
.br
Use hostname in DNS-SD service names instead of serial number/UUID
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_MULTI_QUEUE
.br
Support multiple printers
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_NONE
.br
No options
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_NO_TLS
.br
Disable TLS support 
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_RAW_SOCKET
.br
Accept jobs via raw sockets
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_USB_PRINTER
.br
Accept jobs via USB for default printer (embedded Linux only)
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_INTERFACE
.br
Enable the standard web pages
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_LOG
.br
Enable the log file page
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_NETWORK
.br
Enable the network settings page
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_REMOTE
.br
Allow remote queue management (vs. localhost only)
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_SECURITY
.br
Enable the user/password settings page
.TP 5
PAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_TLS
.br
Enable the TLS settings page
.SS pappl_wifi_state_e
"printer-wifi-state" values
.TP 5
PAPPL_WIFI_STATE_CANNOT_JOIN
.br
\'cannot-join'
.TP 5
PAPPL_WIFI_STATE_JOINING
.br
\'joining'
.TP 5
PAPPL_WIFI_STATE_NOT_CONFIGURED
.br
\'not-configured'
.TP 5
PAPPL_WIFI_STATE_NOT_VISIBLE
.br
\'not-visible'
.TP 5
PAPPL_WIFI_STATE_OFF
.br
\'off'
.TP 5
PAPPL_WIFI_STATE_ON
.br
\'on'
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS papplSystemAddEvent
Add a notification event.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemAddEvent (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_printer_t *printer,
    pappl_job_t *job,
    pappl_event_t event,
    const char *message,
    ...
);
.fi
.SS papplSystemAddListeners
Add network or domain socket listeners.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemAddListeners (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *name
);
.fi
.PP
This function adds socket listeners.  The "name" parameter specifies the
listener address.  Names starting with a slash (/) specify a UNIX domain
socket path, otherwise the name is treated as a fully-qualified domain name
or numeric IPv4 or IPv6 address.  If name is \fBNULL\fR, the "any" addresses are
used ("0.0.0.0" and "[::]").
.PP
Listeners cannot be added after \fIpapplSystemRun\fR is called.
.SS papplSystemAddMIMEFilter
Add a file filter to the system.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemAddMIMEFilter (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *srctype,
    const char *dsttype,
    pappl_mime_filter_cb_t cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function adds a file filter to the system to be used for processing
different kinds of document data in print jobs.  The "srctype" and "dsttype"
arguments specify the source and destination MIME media types as constant
strings.  A destination MIME media type of "image/pwg-raster" specifies a
filter that uses the driver's raster interface.  Other destination types
imply direct submission to the output device using the \fBpapplDeviceXxx\fR
functions.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: This function may not be called while the system is running.
.SS papplSystemAddTimerCallback
Add a timer callback to a system.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemAddTimerCallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    time_t start,
    int interval,
    pappl_timer_cb_t cb,
    void *cb_data
);
.fi
.PP
This function schedules a function that will be called on the main run loop
thread at the specified time and optionally every "interval" seconds
thereafter.  The timimg accuracy is typically within a few milliseconds but
is not guaranteed.  Since the callback is run on the main run loop thread,
functions should create a new thread for any long-running operations.
.PP
The callback function receives the "system" and "cb_data" pointers and
returns \fBtrue\fR to repeat the timer or \fBfalse\fR to remove it:
.PP
.nf
    bool my_timer_cb(pappl_system_t *system, void *cb_data)
    {
      ... do periodic task ...
      return (true); // repeat the timer
    }

.fi

.SS papplSystemCreate
Create a system object.
.PP
.nf
pappl_system_t * papplSystemCreate (
    pappl_soptions_t options,
    const char *name,
    int port,
    const char *subtypes,
    const char *spooldir,
    const char *logfile,
    pappl_loglevel_t loglevel,
    const char *auth_service,
    bool tls_only
);
.fi
.PP
This function creates a new system object, which is responsible for managing
all the printers, jobs, and resources used by the printer application.
.PP
The "options" argument specifies which options are enabled for the server:
.PP
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_NONE\fR: No options.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_DNSSD_HOST\fR: When resolving DNS-SD service name collisions,
  use the DNS-SD hostname instead of a serial number or UUID.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_LOG\fR: Include the log file web page.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_MULTI_QUEUE\fR: Support multiple printers.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_NETWORK\fR: Include the network settings web page.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_RAW_SOCKET\fR: Accept jobs via raw sockets starting on port
  9100.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_REMOTE\fR: Allow remote queue management.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_SECURITY\fR: Include the security settings web page.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_INTERFACE\fR: Include the standard printer and job monitoring
  web pages.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_WEB_TLS\fR: Include the TLS settings page.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBPAPPL_SOPTIONS_USB_PRINTER\fR: Accept jobs via USB for the default printer
  (embedded Linux only).
.PP
The "name" argument specifies a human-readable name for the system.
.PP
The "port" argument specifies the port number to bind to.  A value of \fB0\fR
will cause an available port number to be assigned when the first listener
is added with the \fIpapplSystemAddListeners\fR function.
.PP
The "subtypes" argument specifies one or more comma-delimited DNS-SD service
sub-types such as "_print" and "_universal".
.PP
The "spooldir" argument specifies the location of job files.  If \fBNULL\fR, a
temporary directory is created.
.PP
The "logfile" argument specifies where to send log messages.  If \fBNULL\fR, the
log messages are written to a temporary file.
.PP
The "loglevel" argument specifies the initial logging level.
.PP
The "auth_service" argument specifies a PAM authentication service name.  If
\fBNULL\fR, no user authentication will be provided.
.PP
The "tls_only" argument controls whether the printer application will accept
unencrypted connections.  In general, this argument should always be \fBfalse\fR
(allow unencrypted connections) since not all clients support encrypted
printing.
.SS papplSystemDelete
Delete a system object.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemDelete (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
.IP 5
Note: A system object cannot be deleted while the system is running.
.SS papplSystemFindLoc
Find a localization for the given printer and language.
.PP
.nf
pappl_loc_t * papplSystemFindLoc (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *language
);
.fi
.SS papplSystemFindPrinter
Find a printer by resource, ID, or device URI.
.PP
.nf
pappl_printer_t * papplSystemFindPrinter (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *resource,
    int printer_id,
    const char *device_uri
);
.fi
.PP
This function finds a printer contained in the system using its resource
path, unique integer identifier, or device URI.  If none of these is
specified, the current default printer is returned.
.SS papplSystemFindSubscription
Find a subscription.
.PP
.nf
pappl_subscription_t * papplSystemFindSubscription (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int sub_id
);
.fi
.PP
This function finds the numbered event notification subscription on a system.
.SS papplSystemGetAdminGroup
Get the current administrative group, if any.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetAdminGroup (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current administrative group, if any, to the
specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetAuthService
Get the PAM authorization service, if any.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplSystemGetAuthService (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the PAM authorization service being used by the system
for authentication, if any.
.SS papplSystemGetContact
Get the "system-contact" value.
.PP
.nf
pappl_contact_t * papplSystemGetContact (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_contact_t *contact
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current system contact information to the specified
buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetDNSSDName
Get the current DNS-SD service name.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetDNSSDName (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current DNS-SD service name of the system, if any,
to the specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetDefaultPrintGroup
Get the default print group, if any.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetDefaultPrintGroup (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current default print group, if any, to the
specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetDefaultPrinterID
Get the current "default-printer-id" value.
.PP
.nf
int  papplSystemGetDefaultPrinterID (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the positive integer identifier for the current
default printer or \fB0\fR if there is no default printer.
.SS papplSystemGetFooterHTML
Get the footer HTML for the web interface, if any.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplSystemGetFooterHTML (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the HTML for the web page footer, if any.  The footer
HTML can be set using the \fIpapplSystemSetFooterHTML\fR function.
.SS papplSystemGetGeoLocation
Get the system geo-location string, if any.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetGeoLocation (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current system geographic location as a "geo:" URI
to the specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetHostName
Get the system hostname.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetHostName (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current system hostname to the specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetHostPort
Get the port number for network connections to
                             the system.
.PP
.nf
int  papplSystemGetHostPort (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the port number that is used for network connections
to the system.
.SS papplSystemGetLocation
Get the system location string, if any.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetLocation (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current human-readable location, if any, to the
specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetLogLevel
Get the system log level.
.PP
.nf
pappl_loglevel_t  papplSystemGetLogLevel (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the current system log level as an enumeration.
.SS papplSystemGetMaxClients
Get the maximum number of clients.
.PP
.nf
int  papplSystemGetMaxClients (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function gets the maximum number of simultaneous clients that are
allowed by the system.
.SS papplSystemGetMaxImageSize
Get the maximum supported size for images.
.PP
.nf
size_t  papplSystemGetMaxImageSize (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int *max_width,
    int *max_height
);
.fi
.PP
This function retrieves the image size limits in bytes (uncompressed),
columns, and lines.
.SS papplSystemGetMaxLogSize
Get the maximum log file size.
.PP
.nf
size_t  papplSystemGetMaxLogSize (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function gets the maximum log file size, which is only used when logging
directly to a file.  When the limit is reached, the current log file is
renamed to "filename.O" and a new log file is created.  Set the maximum size
to \fB0\fR to disable log file rotation.
.PP
The default maximum log file size is 1MiB or \fB1048576\fR bytes.
.SS papplSystemGetMaxSubscriptions
Get the maximum number of event subscriptions.
.PP
.nf
size_t  papplSystemGetMaxSubscriptions (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function gets the maximum number of event subscriptions that are
allowed.  A maximum of \fB0\fR means there is no limit.
.PP
The default maximum number of event subscriptions is 100.
.SS papplSystemGetName
Get the system name.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetName (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current system name to the specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetNextPrinterID
Get the next "printer-id" value.
.PP
.nf
int  papplSystemGetNextPrinterID (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the positive integer identifier that will be used for
the next printer that is created.
.SS papplSystemGetOptions
Get the system options.
.PP
.nf
pappl_soptions_t  papplSystemGetOptions (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the system options as a bitfield.
.SS papplSystemGetOrganization
Get the system organization string, if any.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetOrganization (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current organization name, if any, to the
specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetOrganizationalUnit
Get the system organizational unit string, if any.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetOrganizationalUnit (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current organizational unit name, if any, to the
specified buffer.
.SS papplSystemGetPassword
Get the current web site access password.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetPassword (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current web site password hash, if any, to the
specified buffer.
.PP
Note: The access password is only used when the PAM authentication service
is not set.
.SS papplSystemGetServerHeader
Get the Server: header for HTTP responses.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplSystemGetServerHeader (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the value of the HTTP "Server:" header that is used
by the system.
.SS papplSystemGetSessionKey
Get the current session key.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemGetSessionKey (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the current session key to the specified buffer.  The
session key is used for web interface forms to provide CSRF protection and is
refreshed periodically.
.SS papplSystemGetTLSOnly
Get the TLS-only state of the system.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemGetTLSOnly (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns whether the system will only accept encrypted
connections.
.SS papplSystemGetUUID
Get the "system-uuid" value.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplSystemGetUUID (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the system's UUID value.
.SS papplSystemGetVersions
Get the firmware names and versions.
.PP
.nf
int  papplSystemGetVersions (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int max_versions,
    pappl_version_t *versions
);
.fi
.PP
This function copies the system firmware information to the specified buffer.
The return value is always the number of firmware versions that have been
set using the \fIpapplSystemSetVersions\fR function, regardless of the
value of the "max_versions" argument.
.SS papplSystemHashPassword
Generate a password hash using salt and password strings.
.PP
.nf
char * papplSystemHashPassword (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *salt,
    const char *password,
    char *buffer,
    size_t bufsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function generates a password hash using the "salt" and "password"
strings.  The "salt" string should be \fBNULL\fR to generate a new password hash
or the value of an existing password hash to verify that a given plaintext
"password" string matches the password hash.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: Hashed access passwords are only used when the PAM authentication
.IP 5
service is not set.
.SS papplSystemIsRunning
Return whether the system is running.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemIsRunning (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns whether the system is running.
.SS papplSystemIsShutdown
Return whether the system has been shutdown.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemIsShutdown (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns whether the system is shutdown or scheduled to
shutdown.
.SS papplSystemIteratePrinters
Iterate all of the printers.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemIteratePrinters (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_printer_cb_t cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function iterates each of the printers managed by the system.  The
"cb" function is called once per printer with the "system" and "data" values.
.SS papplSystemLoadState
Load the previous system state.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemLoadState (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *filename
);
.fi
.PP
This function loads the previous system state from a file created by the
\fIpapplSystemSaveState\fR function.  The system state contains all of the
system object values, the list of printers, and the jobs for each printer.
.PP
When loading a printer definition, if the printer cannot be created (e.g.,
because the driver name is no longer valid) then that printer and all of its
job history will be lost.  In the case of a bad driver name, a printer
application's driver callback can perform any necessary mapping of the driver
name, including the use its auto-add callback to find a compatible new
driver.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: This function must be called prior to \fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemMatchDriver

.PP
.nf
const char * papplSystemMatchDriver (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *device_id
);
.fi
.SS papplSystemRemoveTimerCallback
Remove a timer callback.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemRemoveTimerCallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_timer_cb_t cb,
    void *cb_data
);
.fi
.PP
This function removes all matching timer callbacks from the specified system.
Both the callback function and data must match to remove a timer.
.SS papplSystemRun
Run the printer application.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemRun (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function runs the printer application, accepting new connections,
handling requests, and processing jobs as needed.  It returns once the
system is shutdown, either through an IPP request or \fBSIGTERM\fR.
.SS papplSystemSaveState
Save the current system state.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplSystemSaveState (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *filename
);
.fi
.PP
This function saves the current system state to a file.  It is typically
used with the \fIpapplSystemSetSaveCallback\fR function to periodically
save the state:
.PP
.nf
    papplSystemSetSaveCallback(system, (pappl_save_cb_t)papplSystemSaveState,
        (void *)filename);

.fi

.SS papplSystemSetAdminGroup
Set the administrative group.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetAdminGroup (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the group name used for administrative requests such as
adding or deleting a printer.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The administrative group is only used when the PAM authorization
.IP 5
service is also set when the system is created.
.SS papplSystemSetAuthCallback
Set an authentication callback for the specified scheme.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetAuthCallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *auth_scheme,
    pappl_auth_cb_t auth_cb,
    void *auth_cbdata
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the authentication callback that is used for Client
requests.  The authentication callback is used for every Client request
containing the WWW-Authenticate header (\fBHTTP_FIELD_WWW_AUTHENTICATE\fR).
The callback returns one of the following status codes:
.PP
.IP \(bu 5
\fBHTTP_STATUS_CONTINUE\fR if the authentication succeeded,
.IP \(bu 5
\fBHTTP_STATUS_UNAUTHORIZED\fR if the authentication failed, or
.IP \(bu 5
\fBHTTP_STATUS_FORBIDDEN\fR if the authentication succeeded but the user is
  not part of the specified group.</li>
</ul>
.SS papplSystemSetContact
Set the "system-contact" value.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetContact (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_contact_t *contact
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the system contact value.
.SS papplSystemSetDNSSDName
Set the DNS-SD service name.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetDNSSDName (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the DNS-SD service name of the system.  If \fBNULL\fR, the
DNS-SD registration is removed.
.SS papplSystemSetDefaultPrintGroup
Set the default print group.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetDefaultPrintGroup (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the default group name used for print requests.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The default print group is only used when the PAM authorization
.IP 5
service is also set when the system is created.
.SS papplSystemSetDefaultPrinterID
Set the "default-printer-id" value.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetDefaultPrinterID (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int default_printer_id
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the default printer using its unique positive integer
identifier.
.SS papplSystemSetEventCallback
Set a callback for monitoring system events.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetEventCallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_event_cb_t event_cb,
    void *event_data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets a callback function to receive event notifications from
the system.
.SS papplSystemSetFooterHTML
Set the footer HTML for the web interface.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetFooterHTML (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *html
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the footer HTML for the web interface.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The footer HTML can only be set prior to calling
.IP 5
\fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemSetGeoLocation
Set the geographic location string.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetGeoLocation (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the geographic location of the system as a "geo:" URI.
If \fBNULL\fR, the location is cleared.
.SS papplSystemSetHostName
Set the system hostname.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetHostName (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the system hostname.  If \fBNULL\fR, the default hostname
is used.
.SS papplSystemSetLocation
Set the system location string, if any.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetLocation (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the human-readable location of the system.  If \fBNULL\fR,
the location is cleared.
.SS papplSystemSetLogLevel
Set the system log level
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetLogLevel (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_loglevel_t loglevel
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the log level as an enumeration.
.SS papplSystemSetMIMECallback
Set the MIME typing callback for the system.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetMIMECallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_mime_cb_t cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets a custom MIME typing callback for the system.  The MIME
typing callback extends the built-in MIME typing support for other media
types that are supported by the application, typically vendor print formats.
.PP
The callback function receives a buffer containing the initial bytes of the
document data, the length of the buffer, and the callback data.  It can then
return \fBNULL\fR if the content is not recognized or a constant string
containing the MIME media type, for example "application/vnd.hp-pcl" for
HP PCL print data.
.SS papplSystemSetMaxClients
Set the maximum number of clients.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetMaxClients (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int max_clients
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the maximum number of simultaneous clients that are
allowed by the system from 0 (auto) to 32768 (half of the available TCP
port numbers).
.PP
The default maximum number of clients is based on available system resources.
.SS papplSystemSetMaxImageSize
Set the maximum allowed JPEG/PNG image sizes.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetMaxImageSize (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    size_t max_size,
    int max_width,
    int max_height
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the maximum size allowed for JPEG and PNG images.  The
default limits are 16384x16384 and 1/10th the maximum memory the current
process can use or 1GiB, whichever is less.
.SS papplSystemSetMaxLogSize
Set the maximum log file size in bytes.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetMaxLogSize (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    size_t maxsize
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the maximum log file size in bytes, which is only used
when logging directly to a file.  When the limit is reached, the current log
file is renamed to "filename.O" and a new log file is created.  Set the
maximum size to \fB0\fR to disable log file rotation.
.PP
The default maximum log file size is 1MiB or \fB1048576\fR bytes.
.SS papplSystemSetMaxSubscriptions
Set the maximum number of event subscriptions.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetMaxSubscriptions (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    size_t max_subscriptions
);
.fi
.PP
This function Sets the maximum number of event subscriptions that are
allowed.  A maximum of \fB0\fR means there is no limit.
.PP
The default maximum number of event subscriptions is \fB100\fR.
.SS papplSystemSetNetworkCallbacks
Set the network configuration callbacks.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetNetworkCallbacks (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_network_get_cb_t get_cb,
    pappl_network_set_cb_t set_cb,
    void *cb_data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the network configuration callbacks for a system.  The
"get" callback reads the configuration of all network interfaces and stores
them in an array of \fIpappl_network_t\fR structures that is passed to the
callback.  The "set" callback writes the configuration of all network
interfaces and returns a boolean value indicating whether the configuration
has been written successfully.
.SS papplSystemSetNextPrinterID
Set the next "printer-id" value.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetNextPrinterID (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int next_printer_id
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the unique positive integer identifier that will be used
for the next printer that is created.  It is typically only called as part
of restoring the state of a system.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The next printer ID can only be set prior to calling
.IP 5
\fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemSetOperationCallback
Set the IPP operation callback.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetOperationCallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_ipp_op_cb_t cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets a custom IPP operation handler for the system that is
called for any IPP operations that are not handled by the built-in IPP
services.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The operation callback can only be set prior to calling
.IP 5
\fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemSetOrganization
Set the system organization string, if any.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetOrganization (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the organization name for the system.  If \fBNULL\fR, the
name is cleared.
.SS papplSystemSetOrganizationalUnit
Set the system organizational unit
                                       string, if any.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetOrganizationalUnit (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the organizational unit name for the system.  If \fBNULL\fR,
the name is cleared.
.SS papplSystemSetPassword
Set the access password hash string.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetPassword (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *hash
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the hash for the web access password.  The hash string is
generated using the \fIpapplSystemHashPassword\fR function.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The access password is only used when the PAM authentication service
.IP 5
is not set.
.SS papplSystemSetPrinterDrivers
Set the list of drivers and the driver
                                   callbacks.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetPrinterDrivers (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int num_drivers,
    pappl_pr_driver_t *drivers,
    pappl_pr_autoadd_cb_t autoadd_cb,
    pappl_pr_create_cb_t create_cb,
    pappl_pr_driver_cb_t driver_cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the lists of printer drivers, the optional auto-add
callback function, the optional creation callback, and the required driver
initialization callback function.
.PP
The auto-add callback ("autoadd_cb") finds a compatible driver name for the
specified printer.  It is used when the client or user specifies the "auto"
driver name, and for the "autoadd" sub-command for the \fBpapplMainloop\fR API.
.PP
The creation callback ("create_cb") is called at the end of printer creation
to make any common changes or additions to a new printer.  It is typically
used to add extra web pages, add per-printer static resources, and/or
initialize the contact and location information.
.PP
The driver initialization callback ("driver_cb") is called to initialize the
\fBpappl_pr_driver_data_t\fR structure, which provides all of the printer
capabilities and callbacks for printing.
.SS papplSystemSetSaveCallback
Set the save callback.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetSaveCallback (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_save_cb_t cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets a callback that is used to periodically save the current
system state.  Typically the callback function ("cb") is
\fIpapplSystemSaveState\fR and the callback data ("data") is the name of
the state file:
.PP
.nf
    papplSystemSetSaveCallback(system, (pappl_save_cb_t)papplSystemSaveState,
        (void *)filename);

.fi

.IP 5
Note: The save callback can only be set prior to calling
.IP 5
\fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemSetUUID
Set the system UUID.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetUUID (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    const char *value
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the system UUID value, overriding the default (generated)
value.  It is typically used when restoring the state of a previous
incarnation of the system.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The UUID can only be set prior to calling \fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemSetVersions
Set the firmware names and versions.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetVersions (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    int num_versions,
    pappl_version_t *versions
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the names and versions of each firmware/software component
of the printer application.
.SS papplSystemSetWiFiCallbacks
Set Wi-Fi callbacks.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemSetWiFiCallbacks (
    pappl_system_t *system,
    pappl_wifi_join_cb_t join_cb,
    pappl_wifi_list_cb_t list_cb,
    pappl_wifi_status_cb_t status_cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the 802.11 Wi-Fi interface callbacks for the system.  The
"join_cb" is used to join a Wi-Fi network, the "list_cb" is used to list
available networks, and the "status_cb" is used to query the current Wi-Fi
network connection status and Secure Set Identifier (SSID).  The "join_cb"
and "status_cb" functions are used to support getting and setting the IPP
"printer-wifi-state", "printer-wifi-ssid", and "printer-wifi-password"
attributes, while the "list_cb" function enables changing the Wi-Fi network
from the network web interface, if enabled.
.PP
Note: The Wi-Fi callbacks can only be set prior to calling
\fIpapplSystemRun\fR.
.SS papplSystemShutdown
Shutdown the system.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemShutdown (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function tells the system to perform an orderly shutdown of all printers
and to terminate the main loop.
.SH STRUCTURES
.SS pappl_network_s
Network interface information
.PP
.nf
struct pappl_network_s
{
  http_addr_t addr4;
  http_addr_t addr6;
  pappl_netconf_t config4;
  pappl_netconf_t config6;
  http_addr_t dns[2];
  char domain[64];
  http_addr_t gateway4;
  http_addr_t gateway6;
  char ident[256];
  http_addr_t linkaddr6;
  http_addr_t mask4;
  char name[64];
  unsigned prefix6;
  bool up;
};
.fi
.SS pappl_pr_driver_s
Printer driver information
.PP
.nf
struct pappl_pr_driver_s
{
  const char *description;
  const char *device_id;
  void *extension;
  const char *name;
};
.fi
.SS pappl_version_s
Firmware version information
.PP
.nf
struct pappl_version_s
{
  char name[64];
  char patches[64];
  char sversion[64];
  unsigned short version[4];
};
.fi
.SS pappl_wifi_s
Wi-Fi status/configuration information
.PP
.nf
struct pappl_wifi_s
{
  char ssid[128];
  pappl_wifi_state_t state;
};
.fi
.SH TYPES
.SS pappl_auth_cb_t
Authentication callback
.PP
.nf
typedef http_status_t (*pappl_auth_cb_t)(pappl_client_t *client, const char *group, gid_t groupid, void *cb_data);
.fi
.SS pappl_ipp_op_cb_t
IPP operation callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_ipp_op_cb_t)(pappl_client_t *client, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_mime_cb_t
MIME typing callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef const char * (*pappl_mime_cb_t)(const unsigned char *header, size_t headersize, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_mime_filter_cb_t
Filter callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_mime_filter_cb_t)(pappl_job_t *job, pappl_device_t *device, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_netconf_t
Network configuration mode
.PP
.nf
typedef enum pappl_netconf_e pappl_netconf_t;
.fi
.SS pappl_network_get_cb_t
Get networks callback
.PP
.nf
typedef size_t (*pappl_network_get_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *cb_data, size_t max_networks, pappl_network_t *networks);
.fi
.SS pappl_network_set_cb_t
Set networks callback
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_network_set_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *cb_data, size_t num_networks, pappl_network_t *networks);
.fi
.SS pappl_network_t
Network interface information
.PP
.nf
typedef struct pappl_network_s pappl_network_t;
.fi
.SS pappl_pr_autoadd_cb_t
Auto-add callback
.PP
.nf
typedef const char * (*pappl_pr_autoadd_cb_t)(const char *device_info, const char *device_uri, const char *device_id, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_pr_create_cb_t
Printer creation callback
.PP
.nf
typedef void (*pappl_pr_create_cb_t)(pappl_printer_t *printer, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_pr_driver_cb_t
Driver callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_pr_driver_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, const char *driver_name, const char *device_uri, const char *device_id, pappl_pr_driver_data_t *driver_data, ipp_t **driver_attrs, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_pr_driver_t
Printer driver information
.PP
.nf
typedef struct pappl_pr_driver_s pappl_pr_driver_t;
.fi
.SS pappl_printer_cb_t
Printer iterator callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef void (*pappl_printer_cb_t)(pappl_printer_t *printer, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_resource_cb_t
Dynamic resource callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_resource_cb_t)(pappl_client_t *client, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_save_cb_t
Save callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_save_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_soptions_t
Bitfield for system options
.PP
.nf
typedef unsigned pappl_soptions_t;
.fi
.SS pappl_timer_cb_t
Timer callback function
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_timer_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *cb_data);
.fi
.SS pappl_version_t
Firmware version information
.PP
.nf
typedef struct pappl_version_s pappl_version_t;
.fi
.SS pappl_wifi_join_cb_t
Wi-Fi join callback
.PP
.nf
typedef bool (*pappl_wifi_join_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *data, const char *ssid, const char *psk);
.fi
.SS pappl_wifi_list_cb_t
Wi-Fi list callback
.PP
.nf
typedef int (*pappl_wifi_list_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *data, cups_dest_t **ssids);
.fi
.SS pappl_wifi_state_t
"printer-wifi-state" values
.PP
.nf
typedef enum pappl_wifi_state_e pappl_wifi_state_t;
.fi
.SS pappl_wifi_status_cb_t
Wi-Fi status callback
.PP
.nf
typedef pappl_wifi_t * (*pappl_wifi_status_cb_t)(pappl_system_t *system, void *data, pappl_wifi_t *wifi_data);
.fi
.SS pappl_wifi_t
Wi-Fi status/configuration information
.PP
.nf
typedef struct pappl_wifi_s pappl_wifi_t;
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pappl (1),
.BR pappl-client (3),
.BR pappl-device (3),
.BR pappl-job (3),
.BR pappl-log (3),
.BR pappl-mainline (3),
.BR pappl-makeresheader (1),
.BR pappl-printer (3),
.BR pappl-resource (3),
.BR pappl-system (3),
https://www.msweet.org/pappl
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2019-2022 by Michael R Sweet.
.PP
.B PAPPL
is licensed under the Apache License Version 2.0 with an (optional) exception to allow linking against GPL2/LGPL2 software (like older versions of CUPS), so it can be used
.I freely
in any project you'd like.
See the files "LICENSE" and "NOTICE" in the source distribution for more information.
