.TH pappl-job 3 "pappl job functions" "2024-01-22" "pappl job functions"
.SH NAME
pappl-job \- pappl job functions
.SH LIBRARY
Printer Application Framework (libpappl, "pkg-config --cflags --libs pappl")
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <pappl/pappl.h>
.PP
.I typedef struct _pappl_job_s
.B pappl_job_t;
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplJobCancel "(pappl_job_t *job);"

.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplJobFilterImage "(pappl_job_t *job, pappl_device_t *device, pappl_joptions_t *options, const unsigned char *pixels, unsigned width, unsigned height, unsigned depth, bool smoothing);"

.PP
.I ipp_attribute_t	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetAttribute "(pappl_job_t *job, const char *name);"
.PP
.I void		*
.br
.BI papplJobGetData "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetFilename "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetFormat "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplJobGetID "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplJobGetImpressions "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplJobGetImpressionsCompleted "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetMessage "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetName "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I pappl_joptions_t	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetOptions "(pappl_job_t *job, pappl_joptions_t *options, unsigned num_pages, bool color);"
.PP
.I pappl_printer_t	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetPrinter "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I pappl_jreason_t
.br
.BI papplJobGetReasons "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I ipp_jstate_t
.br
.BI papplJobGetState "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I time_t
.br
.BI papplJobGetTimeCompleted "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I time_t
.br
.BI papplJobGetTimeCreated "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I time_t
.br
.BI papplJobGetTimeProcessed "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I const char	*
.br
.BI papplJobGetUsername "(pappl_job_t *job);"
.PP
.I bool
.br
.BI papplJobIsCanceled "(pappl_job_t *job);"

.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplJobOpenFile "(pappl_job_t *job, char *fname, size_t fnamesize, const char *directory, const char *ext, const char *mode);"

.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplJobSetData "(pappl_job_t *job, void *data);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplJobSetImpressions "(pappl_job_t *job, int impressions);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplJobSetImpressionsCompleted "(pappl_job_t *job, int add);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplJobSetMessage "(pappl_job_t *job, const char *message, ...);"
.PP
.I void
.br
.BI papplJobSetReasons "(pappl_job_t *job, pappl_jreason_t add, pappl_jreason_t remove);"

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B PAPPL
job functions provide access to the job object.
Jobs and the life cycle of the
.B pappl_job_t
objects are managed automatically by the system object for the printer application.
.PP
The
.B papplJobGet
functions get the current values associated with a job while the
.B papplJobSet
functions set the current values associated with a job.
.PP
The
.B papplJobCancel
function cancels processing of a job, while the
.B papplJobIsCanceled
function returns whether a job is in the canceled state (\fIIPP_JSTATE_CANCELED\fR) or is in the process of being canceled (\fIIPP_JSTATE_PROCESSING\fR and \fIPAPPL_JREASON_PROCESSING_TO_STOP_POINT\fR).
.PP
The
.B papplJobOpenFile
function opens a file associated with the job.
The file descriptor must be closed by the caller using the
.BR close (2)
system call.
.PP
The
.B papplJobFilterImage
function converts raw image data to raster data suitable for the printer.
.SH ENUMERATIONS
.SS pappl_jreason_e
IPP "job-state-reasons" bit values
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_ABORTED_BY_SYSTEM
.br
\'aborted-by-system'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_COMPRESSION_ERROR
.br
\'compression-error'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_DOCUMENT_FORMAT_ERROR
.br
\'document-format-error'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_DOCUMENT_PASSWORD_ERROR
.br
\'document-password-error'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_DOCUMENT_PERMISSION_ERROR
.br
\'document-permission-error'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_DOCUMENT_UNPRINTABLE_ERROR
.br
\'document-unprintable-error'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_ERRORS_DETECTED
.br
\'errors-detected'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_CANCELED_AFTER_TIMEOUT
.br
\'job-canceled-after-timeout'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_CANCELED_AT_DEVICE
.br
\'job-canceled-at-device'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_CANCELED_BY_USER
.br
\'job-canceled-by-user'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_COMPLETED_SUCCESSFULLY
.br
\'job-completed-successfully'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_COMPLETED_WITH_ERRORS
.br
\'job-completed-with-errors'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_COMPLETED_WITH_WARNINGS
.br
\'job-completed-with-warnings'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_DATA_INSUFFICIENT
.br
\'job-data-insufficient'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_FETCHABLE
.br
\'job-fetchable'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_HOLD_UNTIL_SPECIFIED
.br
\'job-hold-until-specified'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_INCOMING
.br
\'job-incoming'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_PRINTING
.br
\'job-printing'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_QUEUED
.br
\'job-queued'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_SPOOLING
.br
\'job-spooling'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_JOB_SUSPENDED_FOR_APPROVAL
.br
\'job-suspended-for-approval'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_NONE
.br
\'none'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_PRINTER_STOPPED
.br
\'printer-stopped'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_PRINTER_STOPPED_PARTLY
.br
\'printer-stopped-partly'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_PROCESSING_TO_STOP_POINT
.br
\'processing-to-stop-point'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_QUEUED_IN_DEVICE
.br
\'queued-in-device'
.TP 5
PAPPL_JREASON_WARNINGS_DETECTED
.br
\'warnings-detected'
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS papplJobCancel
Cancel a job.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobCancel (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function cancels the specified job.  If the job is currently being
printed, it will be stopped at a convenient time (usually the end of a page)
so that the printer will be left in a known state.
.SS papplJobCreatePrintOptions
Create the printer options for a job.
.PP
.nf
pappl_pr_options_t * papplJobCreatePrintOptions (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    unsigned num_pages,
    bool color
);
.fi
.PP
This function allocates a printer options structure and computes the print
options for a job based upon the Job Template attributes submitted in the
print request and the default values set in the printer driver data.
.PP
The "num_pages" and "color" arguments specify the number of pages and whether
the document contains non-grayscale colors - this information typically comes
from parsing the job file.
.SS papplJobCreateWithFile
Create a job with a local file.
.PP
.nf
pappl_job_t * papplJobCreateWithFile (
    pappl_printer_t *printer,
    const char *username,
    const char *format,
    const char *job_name,
    int num_options,
    cups_option_t *options,
    const char *filename
);
.fi
.PP
This function creates a new print job with a local file.  The "num_options"
and "options" parameters specify additional print options, as needed.  The
file specified by "filename" is removed automatically if it resides in the
spool directory.
.SS papplJobDeletePrintOptions
Delete a job options structure.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobDeletePrintOptions (
    pappl_pr_options_t *options
);
.fi
.PP
This function frees the memory used for a job options structure.
.SS papplJobFilterImage
Filter an image in memory.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplJobFilterImage (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    pappl_device_t *device,
    pappl_pr_options_t *options,
    const unsigned char *pixels,
    int width,
    int height,
    int depth,
    int ppi,
    bool smoothing
);
.fi
.PP
This function will print a grayscale or sRGB image using the printer's raster
driver interface, scaling and positioning the image as necessary based on
the job options, and printing as many copies as requested.
.PP
The image data is an array of grayscale ("depth" = \fB1\fR) or sRGB
("depth" = \fB3\fR) pixels starting at the top-left corner of the image.
.PP
The image resolution ("ppi") is expressed in pixels per inch and is used for
some "print-scaling" modes.  Pass \fB0\fR if the image has no explicit resolution
information.
.SS papplJobGetAttribute
Get an attribute from a job.
.PP
.nf
ipp_attribute_t * papplJobGetAttribute (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    const char *name
);
.fi
.PP
This function gets the named IPP attribute from a job.  The returned
attribute can be examined using the \fBippGetXxx\fR functions.
.SS papplJobGetCopies
Get the number of copies in the job.
.PP
.nf
int  papplJobGetCopies (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the number of copies to produce of the job's document
data.
.SS papplJobGetCopiesCompleted
Get the number of completed copies.
.PP
.nf
int  papplJobGetCopiesCompleted (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the number of copies that have been completed.
.SS papplJobGetData
Get per-job driver data.
.PP
.nf
void * papplJobGetData (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the driver data associated with the job.  It is
normally only called from drivers to maintain state for the processing of
the job, for example to store bitmap compression information.
.SS papplJobGetFilename
Get the job's filename.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplJobGetFilename (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the filename for the job's document data.
.SS papplJobGetFormat
Get the MIME media type for the job's file.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplJobGetFormat (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the MIME media type for the job's document data.
.SS papplJobGetID
Get the job ID value.
.PP
.nf
int  papplJobGetID (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the job's unique integer identifier.
.SS papplJobGetImpressions
Get the number of impressions (sides) in the job.
.PP
.nf
int  papplJobGetImpressions (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the number of impressions in the job's document data.
An impression is one side of an output page.
.SS papplJobGetImpressionsCompleted
Get the number of completed impressions
                                      (sides) in the job.
.PP
.nf
int  papplJobGetImpressionsCompleted (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the number of impressions that have been printed.  An
impression is one side of an output page.
.SS papplJobGetMessage
Get the current job message string, if any.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplJobGetMessage (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the current job message string, if any.
.SS papplJobGetName
Get the job name/title.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplJobGetName (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the name or title of the job.
.SS papplJobGetPrinter
Get the printer for the job.
.PP
.nf
pappl_printer_t * papplJobGetPrinter (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the printer containing the job.
.SS papplJobGetReasons
Get the current job state reasons.
.PP
.nf
pappl_jreason_t  papplJobGetReasons (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the current job state reasons bitfield.
.SS papplJobGetState
Get the current job state.
.PP
.nf
ipp_jstate_t  papplJobGetState (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the current job processing state, which is represented
as an enumeration:
.PP
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_ABORTED\fR: Job has been aborted by the system due to an error.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_CANCELED\fR: Job has been canceled by a user.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_COMPLETED\fR: Job has finished printing.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_HELD\fR: Job is being held for some reason, typically because
  the document data is being received.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_PENDING\fR: Job is queued and waiting to be printed.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_PROCESSING\fR: Job is being printed.
.IP \(bu 5
\fBIPP_JSTATE_STOPPED\fR: Job is paused, typically when the printer is not
  ready.</li>
</ul>
.SS papplJobGetTimeCompleted
Get the job completion time, if any.
.PP
.nf
time_t  papplJobGetTimeCompleted (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the date and time when the job reached the completed,
canceled, or aborted states.  \fB0\fR is returned if the job is not yet in one of
those states.
.SS papplJobGetTimeCreated
Get the job creation time.
.PP
.nf
time_t  papplJobGetTimeCreated (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the date and time when the job was created.
.SS papplJobGetTimeProcessed
Get the job processing time.
.PP
.nf
time_t  papplJobGetTimeProcessed (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the date and time when the job started processing
(printing).
.SS papplJobGetUsername
Get the name of the user that submitted the job.
.PP
.nf
const char * papplJobGetUsername (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns the name of the user that submitted the job.
.SS papplJobHold
Hold a job for printing.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplJobHold (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    const char *username,
    const char *until,
    time_t until_time
);
.fi
.PP
This function holds a pending job for printing at a later time.
.SS papplJobIsCanceled
Return whether the job is canceled.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplJobIsCanceled (
    pappl_job_t *job
);
.fi
.PP
This function returns \fBtrue\fR if the job has been canceled or aborted.
.SS papplJobOpenFile
Create or open a file for the document in a job.
.PP
.nf
int  papplJobOpenFile (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    char *fname,
    size_t fnamesize,
    const char *directory,
    const char *ext,
    const char *mode
);
.fi
.PP
This function creates or opens a file for a job.  The "fname" and "fnamesize"
arguments specify the location and size of a buffer to store the job
filename, which incorporates the "directory", printer ID, job ID, job name
(title), and "ext" values.  The job name is "sanitized" to only contain
alphanumeric characters.
.PP
The "mode" argument is "r" to read an existing job file or "w" to write a
new job file.  New files are created with restricted permissions for
security purposes.
.SS papplJobRelease
Release a job for printing.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplJobRelease (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    const char *username
);
.fi
.PP
This function releases a held job for printing.
.SS papplJobResume
Resume processing of a job.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobResume (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    pappl_jreason_t remove
);
.fi
.SS papplJobRetain
Retain a completed job until the specified time.
.PP
.nf
bool  papplJobRetain (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    const char *username,
    const char *until,
    int until_interval,
    time_t until_time
);
.fi
.SS papplJobSetCopiesCompleted
Add completed copies to the job.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSetCopiesCompleted (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    int add
);
.fi
.PP
This function updates the number of completed impressions in a job.  An
impression is one side of an output page.
.SS papplJobSetData
Set the per-job driver data pointer.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSetData (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the driver data for the specified job.  It is
normally only called from drivers to maintain state for the processing of
the job, for example to store bitmap compression information.
.SS papplJobSetImpressions
Set the number of impressions (sides) in a job.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSetImpressions (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    int impressions
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the number of impressions in a job.  An impression is one
side of an output page.
.SS papplJobSetImpressionsCompleted
Add completed impressions (sides) to
                                      the job.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSetImpressionsCompleted (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    int add
);
.fi
.PP
This function updates the number of completed impressions in a job.  An
impression is one side of an output page.
.SS papplJobSetMessage
Set the job message string.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSetMessage (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    const char *message,
    ...
);
.fi
.PP
This function sets the job message string using a \fBprintf\fR-style format
string.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: The maximum length of the job message string is 1023 bytes.
.SS papplJobSetReasons
Set the job state reasons bit values.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSetReasons (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    pappl_jreason_t add,
    pappl_jreason_t remove
);
.fi
.PP
This function updates the job state reasons bitfield.  The "remove" bits
are cleared first, then the "add" bits are set.
.SS papplJobSuspend
Temporarily stop processing of a job.
.PP
.nf
void papplJobSuspend (
    pappl_job_t *job,
    pappl_jreason_t add
);
.fi
.SS papplPrinterFindJob
Find a job.
.PP
.nf
pappl_job_t * papplPrinterFindJob (
    pappl_printer_t *printer,
    int job_id
);
.fi
.PP
This function finds a job submitted to a printer using its integer ID value.
.SS papplSystemCleanJobs
Clean out old (completed) jobs.
.PP
.nf
void papplSystemCleanJobs (
    pappl_system_t *system
);
.fi
.PP
This function deletes all old (completed) jobs above the limit set by the
\fIpapplPrinterSetMaxCompletedJobs\fR function.  The level may temporarily
exceed this limit if the jobs were completed within the last 60 seconds.
.PP
.IP 5
Note: This function is normally called automatically from the
.IP 5
\fIpapplSystemRun\fR function.
.SH TYPES
.SS pappl_jreason_t
Bitfield for IPP "job-state-reasons" values
.PP
.nf
typedef unsigned int pappl_jreason_t;
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pappl (1),
.BR pappl-client (3),
.BR pappl-device (3),
.BR pappl-job (3),
.BR pappl-log (3),
.BR pappl-mainline (3),
.BR pappl-makeresheader (1),
.BR pappl-printer (3),
.BR pappl-resource (3),
.BR pappl-system (3),
https://www.msweet.org/pappl
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2019-2022 by Michael R Sweet.
.PP
.B PAPPL
is licensed under the Apache License Version 2.0 with an (optional) exception to allow linking against GPL2/LGPL2 software (like older versions of CUPS), so it can be used
.I freely
in any project you'd like.
See the files "LICENSE" and "NOTICE" in the source distribution for more information.
