.\"
.\" pappl-exec man page
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2025 by Michael R Sweet
.\"
.\" Licensed under Apache License v2.0.  See the file "LICENSE" for more
.\" information.
.\"
.TH pappl-exec 1 "pappl-exec" "2025-10-10" "Michael R Sweet"
.SH NAME
pappl-exec \- execute a program with restrictions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pappl-exec
[
.B \-R/\-\-read\-only
.I PATH
] [
.B \-W/\-\-read\-write
.I PATH
] [
.B \-X/\-\-read\-exec
.I PATH
] [
.B \-g/\-\-group
.I GROUP
] [
.B \-n/\-\-allow\-networking
] [
.B \-u/\-\-user
.I USER
]
.I PROGRAM
.I ARGUMENT(S)
.br
.B pappl-exec
.I \-\-help
.br
.B pappl-exec
.I \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pappl-exec
executes the specified program with restrictions.
Specifically, the named program is prevented from reading, writing, or executing
arbitrary files and (if the
.I \-n/\-\-allow\-networking
option is not specified) communicating over a network connection.
When run as root,
.B pappl-exec
can also execute the named program as the specified user and/or group.
Any arguments that are file or directory names are added to the list of read-only paths for the program.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are recognized by
.BR pappl-exec :
.TP 5
\fB\-R/\-\-read\-only \fIPATH\fR
Specifies a file or directory that should allow reading.
By default all standard system directories and file/directory arguments are readable.
.TP 5
\fB\-W/\-\-read\-write \fIPATH\fR
Specifies a file or directory that should allow writing.
By default only the current temporary directory (specified by the "TMPDIR" environment variable) is writeable.
.TP 5
\fB\-X/\-\-read\-exec \fIPATH\fR
Specifies a file or directory that should allow execution.
By default all standard command directories and the specified program are executable.
.TP 5
\fB\-g/\-\-group \fIGROUP\fR
Specifies a group to run the program under.
By default the program uses the same group as the caller.
This option only works when running
.B
pappl-exec
as the root user.
.TP 5
.B \-n/\-\-allow\-networking
Specifies that the program requires TCP networking functionality.
By default the program will not be able to make a TCP connection.
.TP 5
\fB\-u/\-\-user \fIUSER\fR
Specifies a user to run the program under.
By default the program uses the same user as the caller.
This option only works when running
.B pappl-exec
as the root user.
.SH NOTES
.B pappl-exec
uses Sandbox (formerly Seatbeat) on macOS and Landlock on Linux to restrict a program's access to the filesystem and network.
Other platforms simple run the program without restrictions.
.PP
.B pappl-exec
provides an additional security layer for external programs run by a printer application.
Printer applications should be deployed using other mechanisms such as containers or virtual machines to further isolate the network service.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pappl (1),
https://www.msweet.org/pappl
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2025 by Michael R Sweet.
.PP
.B PAPPL
is licensed under the Apache License Version 2.0 with an (optional) exception to allow linking against GPL2/LGPL2 software (like older versions of CUPS), so it can be used
.I freely
in any project you'd like.
See the files "LICENSE" and "NOTICE" in the source distribution for more information.
