.TH pappl-mainloop 3 "pappl main loop functions" "2024-01-22" "pappl main loop functions"
.SH NAME
pappl-mainloop \- pappl main loop functions
.SH LIBRARY
Printer Application Framework (libpappl, "pkg-config --cflags --libs pappl")
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <pappl/pappl.h>
.PP
.I int
.br
.BI papplMainloop "(int argc, char *argv[], const char *version, const char *footer_html, int num_drivers, pappl_driver_t *drivers, pappl_driver_cb_t driver_cb, pappl_ml_autoadd_cb_t autoadd_cb, const char *subcmd_name, pappl_ml_subcmd_cb_t subcmd_cb, pappl_ml_system_cb_t system_cb, pappl_ml_usage_cb_t usage_cb, void *data);"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.PP PAPPL
mainloop function starts the printer application and supports standard command-line arguments and behaviors.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS papplMainloop
Run a standard main loop for printer applications.
.PP
.nf
int  papplMainloop (
    int argc,
    char *argv[],
    const char *version,
    const char *footer_html,
    int num_drivers,
    pappl_pr_driver_t *drivers,
    pappl_pr_autoadd_cb_t autoadd_cb,
    pappl_pr_driver_cb_t driver_cb,
    const char *subcmd_name,
    pappl_ml_subcmd_cb_t subcmd_cb,
    pappl_ml_system_cb_t system_cb,
    pappl_ml_usage_cb_t usage_cb,
    void *data
);
.fi
.PP
This function runs a standard main loop for a printer application.  The
"argc" and "argv" arguments are those provided to the \fBmain\fR function.
.PP
The "version" argument specifies a numeric version number for the printer
application that conforms to semantic versioning guidelines with up to four
numbers, for example "1.2.3.4".
.PP
The "footer_html" argument specifies HTML text to use in the footer of the
web interface.  If \fBNULL\fR, the footer is omitted.
.PP
The "num_drivers", "drivers", and "driver_cb" arguments specify a list of
drivers and the driver callback for printers.  Specify \fB0\fR and \fBNULL\fR if
the drivers are configured in the system callback.  The "autoadd_cb"
argument specifies a callback for automatically adding new printers with the
"autoadd" sub-command and for auto-detecting the driver when adding manually.
.PP
The "usage_cb" argument specifies a callback that displays a usage/help
summary.  If \fBNULL\fR, a generic summary is shown as needed.
.PP
The "subcmd_name" and "subcmd_cb" arguments specify the name and a callback
for a custom sub-command.  If \fBNULL\fR, no custom sub-commands will be
supported.
.PP
The "system_cb" argument specifies a function that will create a new
\fBpappl_system_t\fR object.  If \fBNULL\fR, a default system object is created.
.PP
The "data" argument provides application-specific data for each of the
callbacks.
.SS papplMainloopShutdown
Request a shutdown of a running system.
.PP
.nf
void papplMainloopShutdown (void);
.fi
.PP
This function requests that the system started by \fIpapplMainloop\fR be
shutdown.
.SH TYPES
.SS pappl_ml_subcmd_cb_t
Sub-command callback
.PP
.nf
typedef int (*pappl_ml_subcmd_cb_t)(const char *base_name, int num_options, cups_option_t *options, int num_files, char **files, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_ml_system_cb_t
System callback
.PP
.nf
typedef pappl_system_t * (*pappl_ml_system_cb_t)(int num_options, cups_option_t *options, void *data);
.fi
.SS pappl_ml_usage_cb_t
Program usage callback
.PP
.nf
typedef void (*pappl_ml_usage_cb_t)(void *data);
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pappl (1),
.BR pappl-client (3),
.BR pappl-device (3),
.BR pappl-job (3),
.BR pappl-log (3),
.BR pappl-mainline (3),
.BR pappl-makeresheader (1),
.BR pappl-printer (3),
.BR pappl-resource (3),
.BR pappl-system (3),
https://www.msweet.org/pappl
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2019-2022 by Michael R Sweet.
.PP
.B PAPPL
is licensed under the Apache License Version 2.0 with an (optional) exception to allow linking against GPL2/LGPL2 software (like older versions of CUPS), so it can be used
.I freely
in any project you'd like.
See the files "LICENSE" and "NOTICE" in the source distribution for more information.
